'\" t
.TH X3270-SCRIPT 1 "02 October 2020"
.SH "NAME"
Scripting Facilities for
x3270,
c3270 and s3270
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBx3270\fP \fB\-script\fP [ \fIx3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBx3270\fP \fB\-socket\fP [ \fIx3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBx3270\fP \fB\-scriptport \fIport\fP\fP [ \fIx3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBc3270\fP \fB\-socket\fP [ \fIc3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBc3270\fP \fB\-scriptport\fP \fIport\fP [ \fIs3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBs3270\fP [ \fIs3270-options\fP ]
.br
\fBScript\fP ( \fIcommand\fP [ ,\fIarg\fP... ] )
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBx3270\fP scripting facilities allow the interactive 3270
emulators \fBx3270\fP and \fBc3270\fP
to be operated under the control of another
program, and forms the basis for the script-only emulator \fBs3270\fP.
.PP
There are
four
basic scripting methods.
The first is the \fBpeer script\fP facility,
invoked by the \fBx3270\fP
\fB\-script\fP switch, and the default mode for \fBs3270\fP.
This runs the emulator as a child of another process.
Typically this would be a script using
\fIexpect\fP(1), \fIperl\fP(1),
or the co-process facility of the Korn Shell
\fIksh\fP(1).
In this mode, the emulator process looks for commands on its standard input,
and places the responses on standard output.
.PP
The second method is the \fBchild script\fP
facility, invoked by the emulator's \fBScript()\fP action.
This runs a script as a child process of the emulator.
The child has access to pipes connected to the
emulator; the emulator looks for commands on one pipe, and places the responses on the other.
The file descriptor of the pipe for commands to the emulator
is passed in the environment variable X3270INPUT (e.g., the text string "7" if
the file descriptor is 7); the file descriptor
of the pipe for responses from the emulator is passed in the environment
variable X3270OUTPUT.
.PP
The third method uses a TCP socket.
The \fB\-scrpiptport\fP command-line option causes the emulator to
bind a socket to the specified port (on the IPv4 loopback address, 127.0.0.1).
The emulator accepts TCP connections on that port.
Multiple commands and responses can be sent over each connection.
.PP
The fourth method uses a Unix-domain socket.
The \fB\-socket\fP command-line option causes the emulator to
create a Unix-domain stream socket named \fB/tmp/x3sck.\fP\fIpid\fP.
The emulator accepts connections to that socket.
Multiple commands and responses can be sent over each connection.
.PP
It is possible to nest the methods.
For example, a peer or TCP socket script can invoke the \fBScript()\fP action.
The calling script will be resumed when the nested script completes.
.PP
Commands are emulator \fIactions\fP; the syntax is the same as for the
right-hand side of
an \fBx3270\fP or
\fBc3270\fP keymap.
Unlike translation tables, action names are case-insensitive, can be
uniquely abbreviated, and the parentheses may be omitted if there are
no parameters.
Any input line that begins with \fB#\fP or \fB!\fP is treaded as a comment
and will be ignored.
.PP
Any emulator action may be specified.
Several specific actions have been defined for use by scripts, and the behavior
of certain other actions (and of the emulators in general) is different when
an action is initiated by a script.
.PP
Some actions generate output; some may delay completion until the certain
external events occur, such as the host unlocking the keyboard.
The completion of every command is marked by a two-line message.
The first line is the current status of the emulator, documented below.
If the command is successful, the second line is the string "ok"; otherwise it
is the string "error".
.SH "STATUS FORMAT"
The status message consists of 12 blank-separated fields:
.TP
1 Keyboard State
If the keyboard is unlocked, the letter
\fBU\fP.
If the keyboard is locked waiting for a response from the host, or if not
connected to a host, the letter
\fBL\fP.
If the keyboard is locked because of an operator error (field overflow,
protected field, etc.), the letter
\fBE\fP.
.TP
2 Screen Formatting
If the screen is formatted, the letter
\fBF\fP.
If unformatted or in \s-1NVT\s+1 mode, the letter \fBU\fP.
.TP
3 Field Protection
If the field containing the cursor is protected, the letter
\fBP\fP.
If unprotected or unformatted, the letter
\fBU\fP.
.TP
4 Connection State
If connected to a host, the string
\fBC(\fP\fIhostname\fP\fB)\fP.
Otherwise, the letter
\fBN\fP.
.TP
5 Emulator Mode
If connected in 3270 mode, the letter
\fBI\fP.
If connected in \s-1NVT\s+1 line mode, the letter
\fBL\fP.
If connected in \s-1NVT\s+1 character mode, the letter
\fBC\fP.
If connected in unnegotiated mode (no BIND active from the host), the letter
\fBP\fP.
If not connected, the letter
\fBN\fP.
.TP
6 Model Number (2-5)
.TP
7 Number of Rows
The current number of rows defined on the screen.
The host can request that the emulator
use a 24x80 screen, so this number may be smaller than the maximum number of
rows possible with the current model.
.TP
8 Number of Columns
The current number of columns defined on the screen, subject to the same
difference for rows, above.
.TP
9 Cursor Row
The current cursor row (zero-origin).
.TP
10 Cursor Column
The current cursor column (zero-origin).
.TP
11 Window ID
The X window identifier for the main
\fBx3270\fP
window, in hexadecimal preceded by
\fB0x\fP.
For
\fBs3270\fP and \fBc3270\fP,
this is zero.
.TP
12 Command Execution Time
The time that it took for the host to respond to the previous commnd, in
seconds with milliseconds after the decimal.
If the previous command did not require a host response, this is a dash.
.SH "DIFFERENCES"
When an action is initiated by a script, the emulators
behave in several different ways:
.PP
If an error occurs in processing an action, the usual pop-up window does not
appear.
Instead, the text is written to standard output.
.PP
If end-of-file is detected on standard input, the emulator exits.
(A script can exit without killing the emulator
by using the \fBCloseScript()\fP action, below.)
Note that this applies to peer scripts only; end-of-file on the pipe
connected to a child script simply causes the pipes to be closed and
the
\fBScript()\fP
action to complete.
.PP
The \fBQuit()\fP action always causes the emulator to exit.
(When called from the keyboard, it will exit only if not connected to a host.)
.PP
Normally, the AID actions (\fBClear()\fP,
\fBEnter()\fP,
\fBPF()\fP,
and
\fBPA()\fP)
will not complete until the host unlocks the keyboard.
If the parameter to a
\fBString()\fP
action includes a code for one these actions,
it will also wait for the keyboard to unlock before proceeding.
.PP
The \fBAidWait\fP toggle controls with behavior.
When this toggle is set (the default), actions block as described above.
When the toggle is clear, AID actions complete immediately.
The \fBWait(output)\fP action can then be used to delay a script until the
host changes something on the screen, and the
\fBWait(unlock)\fP action can be used to delay a script until the host
unlocks the keyboard, regardless of the state of the \fBAidWait\fP toggle.
.PP
Note that the
\fBScript()\fP
action does not complete until
end-of-file is detected on the pipe or the \fBCloseScript()\fP action is called by the child process.
This behavior is not affected by the state of the \fBAidWait\fP toggle.
.SH "BASIC PROGRAMMING STRATEGIES"
3270 session scripting can be more difficult than other kinds of scripting,
because it can be hard to tell when the host is finished processing a
command.
There is a well-defined 3270 Data Stream facility for doing this: The emulator
locks the keyboard when it sends the host an AID, and the later host unlocks
the keyboard.
The emulator supports this facility directly by not allowing an AID action
to complete until the keyboard is unlocked.
Unfortunately, some hosts and some host applications unlock the keyboard as
soon as they begin processing the command, instead of after it is finished.
A human operator can see on the screen when the command is finished (e.g.,
when a READY prompt is displayed), but it can be difficult for a script to
do this. For such early-unlock hosts, the only option in a script is to poll the
screen until it can determine that the command is complete.
.LP
Another complication is that host I/O and script operation are asynchronous.
That is, the host can update the screen at any time, even between actions that
are reading the screen contents, so a script can get inconsistent results.
Assistance for this problem is provided by the \fBSnap()\fP action.
The \fBSnap(save)\fP action saves a snapshot of the screen in a special
buffer. Then the script can use \fBSnap()\fP variants of the \fBAscii1()\fP and
\fBEbcdic1()\fP actions (\fBSnap(Ascii1)\fP and \fBSnap(Ebcdic1)\fP) to query
the saved buffer -- which the host cannot modify -- to get the data it wants.
Finally, \fBSnap(wait,output)\fP blocks the script until the host
modifies the screen, specifically since the last call to \fBSnap(save)\fP.
Thus a script can poll the screen efficiently by writing a loop that begins
with \fBSnap(save)\fP and ends with \fBSnap(wait,output)\fP.
.SH "SCRIPT-SPECIFIC ACTIONS"
The following actions have been defined or modified for use with scripts.
Note that actions that use row and column coordinates generally use an origin
of 1, with row 1 at the top and column 1 at the left. This is consistent with
the on-screen cursor position and data stream trace messages.
.TP
\fBAnsiText()\fP
Outputs whatever data that has been output by the host in
\s-1NVT\s+1 mode
since the last time that
\fBAnsiText()\fP
was called.
The data is preceded by the string "data:\ ", and has had all control characters
expanded into C backslash sequences.
.IP
This is a convenient way to capture
\s-1NVT\s+1
mode output in a synchronous manner without trying to decode the screen
contents.
.TP
\fBAscii1\fP(\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP,\fIrows\fP,\fIcols\fP)
.TP
\fBAscii1\fP(\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP,\fIlength\fP)
.TP
\fBAscii1\fP(\fIlength\fP)
.TP
\fBAscii1\fP()
Outputs an \s-1ASCII\s+1 text representation of the screen contents.
Each line is preceded by the string "data:\ ", and there are no control
characters.
.IP
If four parameters are given, a rectangular region of the screen is output.
(Note that the row and column are 1-origin.)
.IP
If three parameters are given,
\fIlength\fP
characters are output, starting at the specified 1-origin row and column.
.IP
If only the
\fIlength\fP
parameter is given, that many characters are output, starting at the cursor
position.
.IP
If no parameters are given, the entire screen is output.
.IP
The \s-1EBCDIC\s+1-to-\s-1ASCII\s+1 translation and output character set depend on the both the
emulator host code page (the \fB\-codepage\fP option) and the locale.
UTF-8 and certain \s-1DBCS\s+1 locales may result in multi-byte expansions of \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
characters that translate to \s-1ASCII\s+1 codes greater than 0x7f.
.TP
\fBAsciiField()\fP
Outputs an \s-1ASCII\s+1 text representation of the field containing the cursor.
The text is preceded by the string "data:\ ".
.TP
\fBConnect\fP(\fIhostname\fP)
Connects to a host.
The command does not return until the emulator
is successfully connected in the proper mode, or the connection fails.
.TP
\fBCloseScript\fP(\fIstatus\fP)
Causes the emulator to stop reading commands from the script.
This is useful to allow a peer script to exit, with the emulator
proceeding interactively.
(Without this command, the emulator
would exit when it detected end-of-file on standard input.)
If the script was invoked by the
\fBScript()\fP
action, the optional
\fIstatus\fP
is used as the return status of
\fBScript()\fP;
if nonzero,
\fBScript()\fP
will complete with an error, and if this script was invoked as part of
login through the
\fBibm_hosts\fP
file, the connection will be broken.
.TP
\fBDisconnect()\fP
Disconnects from the host.
.TP
\fBEbcdic1\fP(\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP,\fIrows\fP,\fIcols\fP)
.TP
\fBEbcdic1\fP(\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP,\fIlength\fP)
.TP
\fBEbcdic1\fP(\fIlength\fP)
.TP
\fBEbcdic1()\fP
The same function as
\fBAscii1()\fP
above, except that rather than generating
\s-1ASCII\s+1
text, each character is output as a 2-digit or 4-digit hexadecimal
\s-1EBCDIC\s+1
code.
.TP
\fBEbcdicField()\fP
The same function as
\fBAsciiField()\fP
above, except that it generates hexadecimal
\s-1EBCDIC\s+1
codes.
.TP
\fBInfo\fP(\fImessage\fP)
In x3270, pops up an informational message.
In c3270 and wc3270, writes an informational message to the OIA (the line below
the display).
Not defined for s3270 or tcl3270.
.TP
\fBExpect\fP(\fItext\fP[,\fItimeout\fP])
Pauses the script until the specified
\fItext\fP
appears in the data stream from the host, or the specified
\fItimeout\fP
(in seconds) expires.
If no
\fItimeout\fP
is specified, the default is 30 seconds.
\fIText\fP
can contain standard C-language escape (backslash) sequences.
No wild-card characters or pattern anchor characters are understood.
\fBExpect()\fP
is valid only in
\s-1NVT\s+1
mode.
.TP
\fBKeymap([\fIkeymap\fP])\fP
Adds or removes a temporary keymap.
If the \fIkeymap\fP parameter is given, the named keymap is added.
If no parameter is given, the most recently added keymap is removed.
.TP
\fBMoveCursor1\fP(\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP)
Moves the cursor to the specified 1-origin coordinates.
.TP
\fBMoveCursor1\fP(\fIoffset\fP)
Moves the cursor to the specified offset. Offset 0 is the upper left-hand
corner of the screen.
.TP
\fBPrintText\fP([\fBcommand\fP,]\fIfilter\fP)
Pipes an \s-1ASCII\s+1 representation of the current screen image through the named
\fIfilter\fP, e.g., \fBlpr\fP.
.TP
\fBPrintText\fP([\fBhtml\fP,][\fBappend\fP,][\fBreplace\fP,]\fBfile\fP,\fIfilename\fP)
Saves the current screen contents in a file.
With the \fBhtml\fP option, saves it as HTML, otherwise saves it as plain
\s-1ASCII\s+1.
The \fBappend\fP option (the default) causes the data to be appended to the
file if it already exists. The \fBreplace\fP option causes the file to be
overwritten instead.
.TP
\fBPrintText\fP(\fBhtml,string\fP)
Returns the current screen contents as HTML.
.TP
\fBQuery\fP(\fIkeyword\fP)
Returns state information.
Keywords are:
.PP
.TS
center;
l l .
T{
.na
.nh
Keyword
T}	T{
.na
.nh
output
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
BindPluName
T}	T{
.na
.nh
BIND PLU returned by the host
T}
T{
.na
.nh
ConnectionState
T}	T{
.na
.nh
TN3270/TN3270E mode and submode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
CodePage
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Host code page
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Cursor
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Cursor position (row col) zero-origin
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Cursor1
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Cursor position (row col) 1-origin
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Formatted
T}	T{
.na
.nh
3270 format state (formatted or unformatted)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Host
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Host name and port
T}
T{
.na
.nh
LocalEncoding
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Local character encoding
T}
T{
.na
.nh
LuName
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Host name LU name
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Model
T}	T{
.na
.nh
3270 model name (IBM-327x-n)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
ScreenCurSize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Current screen size (rows cols)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
ScreenMaxSize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Maximum screen size (rows cols)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Tls
T}	T{
.na
.nh
TLS state (secure or not-secure) and host validation state (host-verified or host-unverified)
T}
.TE
.IP
Without a \fIkeyword\fP, \fBQuery()\fP returns each of the defined attributes,
one per line, labeled by its name.
.TP
\fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBascii\fP)
Dumps the contents of the screen buffer, one line per row.
Each buffer position inside a data field is generally output as a 2-digit
hexadecimal code, translated from the host \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 code page to the
current locale.
(E.g., the \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 value for the letter A in host code page 037 is
X'C1'. In \s-1ASCII\s+1, this is 0x41, so it is output as \fB41\fP.)
If the current locale specifies a multi-byte character set such as UTF-8, some
positions may be output as 4-, 6- or 8-digit codes.
(E.g., in host code page 037, the \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 value for a U+00ac NOT symbol
is X'5F'. In UTF-8, this is 0xc2, 0xac, so it is output as \fBc2ac\fP.)
\s-1DBCS\s+1 characters take two positions in the screen buffer; the first location
is output as a multi-byte code, and the second location is output as a dash.
Start-of-field characters (each of which takes up a display position) are
output as \fBSF(aa=nn[,...])\fP, where \fIaa\fP is a field
attribute type and \fInn\fP is its value.
.PP
.TS
center;
l l .
T{
.na
.nh
Attribute
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Values
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
c0 basic 3270
T}	T{
.na
.nh
20 protected
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
10 numeric
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
04 detectable
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
08 intensified
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
0c non-display
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
01 modified
T}
T{
.na
.nh
41 highlighting
T}	T{
.na
.nh
f1 blink
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f2 reverse
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f4 underscore
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f8 intensify
T}
T{
.na
.nh
42 foreground
T}	T{
.na
.nh
f0 neutral black
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f1 blue
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f2 red
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f3 pink
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f4 green
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f5 turquoise
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f6 yellow
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f7 neutral white
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f8 black
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f9 deep blue
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
fa orange
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
fb purple
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
fc pale green
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
fd pale turquoise
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
fe grey
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
ff white
T}
T{
.na
.nh
43 character set
T}	T{
.na
.nh
f0 default
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f1 APL
T}
T{
.na
.nh

T}	T{
.na
.nh
f8 DBCS
T}
.TE
.IP
Extended attributes (which do not take up display positions) are output as
\fBSA(aa=nn)\fP, with \fIaa\fP and \fInn\fP having
the same definitions as above (though the basic 3270 attribute will never
appear as an extended attribute).
.IP
\s-1NULL\s+1 characters in the screen buffer are reported as \s-1ASCII\s+1
character 00 instead of 20, even though they are displayed as blanks.
.TP
\fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBebcdic\fP)
Equivalent to \fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBascii\fP), but with the data fields output as
hexadecimal \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 codes.
If a buffer position has the Graphic Escape attribute, it is
displayed as \fBGE\fP(\fIxx\fP).
If a buffer position was written in NVT mode, it does not have an
EBCDIC value, and will be displayed as 00.
.TP
\fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBunicode\fP)
Equivalent to \fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBascii\fP), but with the data fields output
as 4-digit hexadecimal Unicode values.
.TP
\fBReadBuffer\fP(\fBfield\fP)
Dumps information about the current field.
\fBascii\fP, \fBebcdic\fP and \fBunicode\fP keywords are also accepted.
The output consists of keywords and parameters.
Note that `field start' is the location of the start-of-field
character, which is displayed on the screen as a blank to the left of the
field, and is dumped as \fBSF\fP. The \fBContents\fP line is always last.
.TS
center;
l l l .
T{
.na
.nh
Keyword
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Parameters
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Meaning
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
Start1
T}	T{
.na
.nh
row col
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Field start coordinates (1-origin)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
StartOffset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
offset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Field start location as offset
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Cursor1
T}	T{
.na
.nh
row col
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Cursor coordinates (1-origin)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
CursorOffset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
offset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Cursor location as offset
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Contents
T}	T{
.na
.nh
contents
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Field contents on one line in \fBReadBuffer()\fP format
T}
.TE
.TP
\fBScript\fP(\fIpath\fP[,arg...])
Runs a child script, passing it optional command-line arguments.
\fIpath\fP must specify an executable (binary) program: the emulator will
create a new process and execute it. If you simply want the emulator to read
commands from a file, use the \fBSource()\fP action.
.TP
\fBSnap()\fP
Equivalent to \fBSnap(save)\fP (see below).
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBAscii1\fP,...)
Performs the \fBAscii1\fP action on the saved screen image.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBCols\fP)
Returns the number of columns in the saved screen image.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBEbcdic1\fP,...)
Performs the \fBEbcdic1()\fP action on the saved screen image.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBReadBuffer\fP)
Performs the \fBReadBuffer()\fP action on the saved screen image.
.TP
\fBSnap(\fBRows\fP)\fP
Returns the number of rows in the saved screen image.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBsave\fP)
Saves a copy of the screen image and status in a temporary buffer.
This copy can be queried with other
\fBSnap()\fP
actions to allow a script to examine a consistent screen image, even when the
host may be changing the image (or even the screen dimensions) dynamically.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBstatus\fP)
Returns the status line from when the screen was last saved.
.TP
\fBSnap\fP(\fBwait\fP[,\fItimeout\fP],\fBoutput\fP)
Pauses the script until the host sends further output, then updates the snap
buffer with the new screen contents.
Used when the host unlocks the keyboard (allowing the script to proceed after
an
\fBEnter()\fP,
\fBPF()\fP
or
\fBPA()\fP
action), but has not finished updating the screen.
This action is usually invoked in a loop that uses the
\fBSnap(Ascii1)\fP
or
\fBSnap(Ebcdic1)\fP
action to scan the screen for some pattern that indicates that the host has
fully processed the last command.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBSnap()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.TP
\fBSource\fP(\fIfile\fP)
Read and execute commands from \fIfile\fP.
Any output from those commands will become the output from \fBSource()\fP.
If any of the commands fails, the \fBSource()\fP command will \fInot\fP abort;
it will continue reading commands until EOF.
.TP
\fBTitle\fP(\fItext\fP)
Changes the
x3270
window title to \fItext\fP.
.TP
\fBTransfer\fP(\fIkeyword\fP=\fIvalue\fP,...)
Invokes IND$FILE file transfer.
See \s-1FILE TRANSFER\s+1 below.
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fB3270mode\fP)
Used when communicating with a host that switches between
\s-1NVT\s+1 mode and 3270 mode.
Pauses the script or macro until the host negotiates 3270 mode, then waits for
a formatted screen as above.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.IP
For backwards compatibility,
\fBWait(3270)\fP
is equivalent to
\fBWait\fP(\fB3270mode\fP)
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fBdisconnect\fP)
Pauses the script until the host disconnects.
Often used to after sending a
\fIlogoff\fP
command to a \s-1VM/CMS\s+1 host, to ensure that the session is not unintentionally
set to
\fBdisconnected\fP
state.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fBinputfield\fP)
A useful utility for use at the beginning of scripts and after the
\fBConnect()\fP action.
In 3270 mode, waits until the screen is formatted, and the host has positioned
the cursor on a modifiable field.
In \s-1NVT\s+1 mode, waits until the host sends at least one byte of data.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.IP
For backwards compatibility,
\fBWait\fP
is equivalent to
\fBWait\fP(\fBinputfield\fP).
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fBnvtmode\fP)
Used when communicating with a host that switches between 3270 mode and
\s-1NVT\s+1 mode.
Pauses the script or macro until the host negotiates \s-1NVT\s+1
mode, then waits for
a byte from the host as above.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.IP
For backwards compatibility,
\fBWait\fP(\fBansi\fP)
is equivalent to
\fBWait\fP(\fBnvtmode\fP).
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fBoutput\fP)
Pauses the script until the host sends further output.
Often needed when the host unlocks the keyboard (allowing the script to
proceed after a
\fBClear()\fP,
\fBEnter()\fP,
\fBPF()\fP
or
\fBPA()\fP
action), but has not finished updating the screen.
Also used in non-blocking AID mode (see \s-1DIFFERENCES\s+1
for details).
This action is usually invoked in a loop that uses the
\fBAscii1()\fP
or
\fBEbcdic1()\fP
action to scan the screen for some pattern that indicates that the host has
fully processed the last command.
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.TP
\fBWait\fP([\fItimeout\fP,] \fBunlock\fP)
Pauses the script until the host unlocks the keyboard.
This is useful when operating in non-blocking AID mode
(\fBtoggle AidWait clear\fP), to wait for a host command to complete.
See \s-1DIFFERENCES\s+1 for details).
.IP
The optional \fItimeout\fP parameter specifies a number of seconds to wait
before failing the \fBWait()\fP action.  The default is to wait indefinitely.
.TP
\fBWait\fP(\fItimeout\fP, \fBseconds\fP)
Delays the script \fItimeout\fP seconds.
Unlike the other forms of \fBWait()\fP, the timeout is not optional.
.TP
\fBWindowState\fP(\fImode\fP)
If \fImode\fP is \fBiconic\fP, changes the x3270 window into an icon.
If \fImode\fP is \fBnormal\fP, changes the x3270 window from an icon to a
normal window.
.SH "FILE TRANSFER"
The \fBTransfer()\fP action implements \fBIND$FILE\fP file transfer.
This action requires that the \fBIND$FILE\fP
program be installed on the \s-1IBM\s+1 host, and that the 3270 cursor
be located in a field that will accept a \s-1TSO\s+1 or \s-1VM/CMS\s+1 command.
.LP
The \fBTransfer()\fP action
can be entered at the \fBc3270>\fP prompt with no parameters, which will cause it
to prompt interactively for the file names and options.
It can also be invoked with parameters to define the entire transfer.
.LP
Because of the complexity and number of options for file transfer, the
parameters to the \fBTransfer()\fP action can take the unique form
of \fIoption\fP=\fIvalue\fP.
They can also be given with their parameters separately.
Options can appear in any order.
Note that if the \fIvalue\fP contains spaces (such as a VM/CMS file name),
then the entire parameter must be quoted, e.g., \fB"hostfile=xxx foo a"\fP.
With sequential options, this would be \fBhostfile,"xxx foo a"\fP.
The options are:
.LP
.TS
l c l l.
T{
.na
.nh
Option
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Required?
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Default
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Other Values
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
direction
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
receive
T}	T{
.na
.nh
send
T}
T{
.na
.nh
hostfile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
localfile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
host
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
tso
T}	T{
.na
.nh
vm, cics
T}
T{
.na
.nh
mode
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
ascii
T}	T{
.na
.nh
binary
T}
T{
.na
.nh
cr
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
remove
T}	T{
.na
.nh
add, keep
T}
T{
.na
.nh
remap
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
no
T}
T{
.na
.nh
exist
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
keep
T}	T{
.na
.nh
replace, append
T}
T{
.na
.nh
recfm
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
fixed, variable, undefined
T}
T{
.na
.nh
lrecl
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
blksize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
allocation
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
tracks, cylinders, avblock
T}
T{
.na
.nh
primaryspace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Sometimes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
secondaryspace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
avblock
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Sometimes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
buffersize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
4096
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
.TE
.LP
The option details are as follows.
.TP
\fBdirection\fP
\fBsend\fP to send a file to the host,
\fBreceive\fP to receive a file from the host.
.TP
\fBhostfile\fP
The name of the file on the host.
.TP
\fBlocalfile\fP
The name of the file on the local workstation.
.TP
\fBhost\fP
The type of host (which dictates the form of the \fBIND$FILE\fP command):
\fBtso\fP (the default), \fBvm\fP or \fBcics\fP.
.TP
\fBmode\fP
Use \fBascii\fP (the default) for a text file, which will be translated
between \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 and \s-1ASCII\s+1 as necessary.
Use \fBbinary\fP for non-text files.
.TP
\fBcr\fP
Controls how newline characters are handled when transferring
\fBmode=ascii\fP files.
\fBremove\fP (the default) strips newline characters in local files
before transferring them to the host.
\fBadd\fP adds newline characters to each host file record before
transferring it to the local workstation.
\fBkeep\fP preserves newline characters when transferring a local file
to the host.
.TP
\fBremap\fP
Controls text translation for \fBmode=ascii\fP files.
The value \fByes\fP (the default) causes c3270 to remap the text to ensure
maximum compatibility between the workstation's character set and encoding
and the host's \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 code page.
The value \fBno\fP causes c3270 to pass the text to or from the host
as-is, leaving all translation to the \fBIND$FILE\fP program on the host.
.TP
\fBexist\fP
Controls what happens when the destination file already exists.
\fBkeep\fP (the default) preserves the file, causing the
\fBTransfer()\fP action to fail.
\fBreplace\fP overwrites the destination file with the source file.
\fBappend\fP appends the source file to the destination file.
.TP
\fBrecfm\fP
Controls the record format of files created on the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
\fBfixed\fP creates a file with fixed-length records.
\fBvariable\fP creates a file with variable-length records.
\fBundefined\fP creates a file with undefined-length records (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts
only).
The \fBlrecl\fP option controls the record length or maximum record length for
\fBrecfm=fixed\fP and \fBrecfm=variable\fP files, respectively.
.TP
\fBlrecl\fP
Specifies the record length (or maximum record length) for files created on
the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBblksize\fP
Specifies the block size for files created on the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBallocation\fP
Specifies the units for the \fBprimaryspace\fP and
\fBsecondaryspace\fP options: \fBtracks\fP, \fBcylinders\fP or
\fBavblock\fP. (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBprimaryspace\fP
Primary allocation for a file.
The units are given by the \fBallocation\fP option.
Required when the \fBallocation\fP is specified as something other than
\fBdefault\fP.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBsecondaryspace\fP
Secondary allocation for a file.
The units are given by the \fBallocation\fP option. (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.) 
.TP
\fBavblock\fP
Average block size, required when \fBallocation\fP specifies \fBavblock\fP.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBbuffersize\fP
Buffer size for DFT-mode transfers.
Can range from 256 to 32768.
Larger values give better performance, but some hosts may not be able to
support them.
.LP
There are also resources that control the default values for each of the
file transfer parameters.
These resources have the same names as the \fBTransfer()\fP keywords, but with
\fBft\fP prepended and the option name capitalized. E.g., the default for the \fBmode\fP keyword is the
\fBc3270.ftMode\fP resource.
.SH "DEPRECATED/COMPATIBILITY ACTIONS"
For comptibility with earlier versions, there are alternate versions of
several of these actions. These versions use zero-origin coordinates, with row
0 at the top and column 0 on the left.

.TP
\fBAscii\fP(...)
.TP
\fBEbcdic\fP(...)
.TP
\fBMoveCursor\fP(...)
Identical to \fBAscii1()\fP, \fBEbcdic1()\fP and \fBMoveCursor1()\fP, but using
zero-origin coordinates.
.PP
The \fBSnap()\fP action also accepts \fBAscii\fP and \fBEbcdic\fP keywords,
allowing zero-origin coordinates.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
expect(1)
.br
perl(1)
.br
ksh(1)
.br
x3270(1)
.br
x3270if(1)
.br
c3270(1)
.br
s3270(1)
.SH "VERSION"
Version 4.0ga12
