'\" t
.TH tcl3270 1 "28 April 2020"
.SH "NAME"
tcl3270 \-
\s-1IBM\s+1 host access tool
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBtcl3270\fP
[\fIscript\fP]
[\fIoptions\fP]
[\fIhost\fP]
[\-\- \fIscript-arg\fP...]

.br
\fBtcl3270\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIscript\fP] \fIsession-file\fP.tcl3270
[\-\- \fIscript-arg\fP...]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBtcl3270\fP opens a telnet connection to an \s-1IBM\s+1
host, then allows a tcl script to control the host login
session.
It is derived from
\fIx3270\fP(1),
an X-windows IBM 3270 emulator.
It implements RFCs 2355 (TN3270E), 1576 (TN3270) and 1646 (LU name selection),
and supports IND$FILE file transfer.
The full syntax for \fIhost\fP is:
.RS
[\fIprefix\fP:]...[\fILUname\fP@]\fIhostname\fP[:\fIport\fP][=\fIaccept\fP]
.RE
.LP
Prepending a \fBP:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP causes the connection to go
through the \fItelnet-passthru\fP service rather than directly to the host.
See \s-1PASSTHRU\s+1 below.
.LP
Prepending an \fBS:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP removes the "extended data
stream" option reported to the host.
See \fB\-tn\fP below for further information.
.LP
Prepending an \fBN:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP
turns off TN3270E support for the session.
.LP
Prepending an \fBL:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP
causes \fBtcl3270\fP to first create an SSL/TLS tunnel to the host, and then
create a TN3270 session inside the tunnel.  (This function is supported only if
\fBtcl3270\fP was built with SSL/TLS support).
Note that TLS-encrypted sessions using the TELNET START-TLS option are
negotiated with the host automatically; for these sessions the \fBL:\fP prefix
should not be used.
.LP
Prepending a \fBY:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP
causes \fBtcl3270\fP to skip validation of host SSL/TLS certificates.
This overrides any other configuration or command-line options.
.LP
Prepending an \fBA:\fP onto \fIhostname\fP is equivalent to setting the
\fB\-nvt\fP option; it forces an NVT-mode session instead of a
3270-mode session.
.LP
A specific Logical Unit (LU) name to use may be specified by prepending it to
the \fIhostname\fP with an `\fB@\fP'.
Multiple LU names to try can be separated by commas.
An empty LU can be placed in the list with an extra comma.
(Note that the LU name is used for different purposes by different kinds of
hosts.
For example, CICS uses the LU name as the Terminal ID.)
.LP
The \fIhostname\fP may optionally be placed inside square-bracket
characters `\fB[\fP' and `\fB]\fP'.
This will prevent any colon `\fB:\fP' characters in the hostname
from being interpreted as indicating option prefixes or port numbers.
This allows numeric IPv6 addresses to be used as hostnames.
.LP
On systems that support the \fIforkpty\fP library call, the
\fIhostname\fP may be replaced with \fB\-e\fP and a command string.
This will cause \fBtcl3270\fP to connect to a local child process, such as
a shell.
.LP
The port to connect to defaults to
\fBtelnet\fP.
This can be overridden with the \fB\-port\fP option, or by appending
a \fIport\fP to the \fIhostname\fP with a colon
`\fB:\fP'.
(For compatability with previous versions of \fBtcl3270\fP
and with \fItn3270\fP(1), the \fIport\fP
may also be specified as a second, separate argument.)
.LP
An optional accept name (a hostname to accept in the host's SSL/TLS
certificate) may be specified by appending it to the hostname with an equals
sign (`\fB=\fP').
The accept name can also be specified with the \fB\-accepthostname\fP
option.

.SH "OPTIONS"
 \fBtcl3270\fP understands
the following options:
.TP
\fB\-accepthostname\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies a particular hostname to accept when validating the name presented
in the server SSL certificate, instead of comparing to the name
used to make the connection.
.TP
\fB\-cadir\fP \fIdirectory\fP
Specifies a directory containing CA (root) certificates to use when verifying a
certificate provided by the host. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-cafile\fP \fIfilename\fP
Specifies a \s-1PEM\s+1-format file containing CA (root) certificates to use
when verifying a certificate provided by the host. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-certfile\fP \fIfilename\fP
Specifies a file containing a client certificate to provide to the host.
The default file type is \s-1PEM\s+1.
.TP
\fB\-clientcert\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies the name of a client certificate to provide to the host.
(MacOS only)
.TP
\fB\-certfiletype\fP \fItype\fP
Specifies the type of the certificate file specified
by \fB\-certfile\fP.
\fIType\fP can be \fBpem\fP or \fBasn1\fP. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-chainfile \fIfilename\fP\fP
Specifies a certificate chain file in \s-1PEM\s+1 format, containing a
certificate to provide to the host, as well as one or more
intermediate certificates and the CA certificate used to sign that certificate.
If \fB\-chainfile\fP is specified, it
overrides \fB\-certfile\fP. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-charset\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies an \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 host character set.
.TP
\fB\-clear\fP \fItoggle\fP
Sets the initial value of \fItoggle\fP to \fBfalse\fP.
.TP
\fB\-connecttimeout\fP \fIseconds\fP
Specifies the time that tcl3270 will wait for a host connection to
complete.
.TP
\fB\-devname\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies a device name (workstation ID) for RFC 4777 support.
.TP
\fB\-keyfile\fP \fIfilename\fP
Specifies a file containing the private key for the certificate file
(specified via \fB\-certfile\fP or \fB\-chainfile\fP).
The default file type is \s-1PEM\s+1. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-keyfiletype\fP \fItype\fP
Specifies the type of the private key file specified
by \fB\-keyfile\fP.
\fIType\fP can be \fBpem\fP or \fBasn1\fP. (OpenSSL only)
.TP
\fB\-keypasswd\fP \fItype\fP:\fIvalue\fP
Specifies the password for the private key file (OpenSSL) or client
certificate file (MacOS), if it is encrypted.
The argument can be \fBfile\fP:\fIfilename\fP, specifying that the
password is in a file, or \fBstring\fP:\fIstring\fP, specifying the
password on the command-line directly.
If the private key file is encrypted and no \fB\-keypasswd\fP
option is given,
secure connections will not be allowed.
.TP
\fB\-km\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies the local encoding method for multi-byte text.
\fIname\fP is an encoding name recognized by the ICU library.
(Supported only when tcl3270 is compiled with DBCS support, and necessary
only when tcl3270 cannot figure it out from the locale.)
.TP
\fB\-loginmacro\fP \fIAction(arg...) ...\fP
Specifies a macro to run at login time.
.TP
\fB\-model\fP \fIname\fP
The model of 3270 display to be emulated.
The model name is in two parts, either of which may be omitted:
.IP
The first part is the
\fBbase model\fP,
which is either \fB3278\fP or \fB3279\fP.
\fB3278\fP specifies a monochrome (green on black) 3270 display;
\fB3279\fP specifies a color 3270 display.
.IP
The second part is the
\fBmodel number\fP,
which specifies the number of rows and columns.
Model 4 is the default.
.PP
.TS
center;
c c c .
T{
.na
.nh
Model Number
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Columns
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Rows
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
2
T}	T{
.na
.nh
80
T}	T{
.na
.nh
24
T}
T{
.na
.nh
3
T}	T{
.na
.nh
80
T}	T{
.na
.nh
32
T}
T{
.na
.nh
4
T}	T{
.na
.nh
80
T}	T{
.na
.nh
43
T}
T{
.na
.nh
5
T}	T{
.na
.nh
132
T}	T{
.na
.nh
27
T}
.TE
.IP
Note: Technically, there is no such 3270 display as a 3279-4 or 3279-5, but
most hosts seem to work with them anyway.
.IP
The default model
is \fB3279\-4\fP.
.TP
\fB\-noverifycert\fP
For SSL/TLS connections, do not verify the host certificate.
.TP
\fB\-nvt\fP
Start in NVT mode instead of waiting for the host to send data, and make the
default terminal type \fBxterm\fP.
.TP
\fB\-oversize\fP \fIcols\fP\fBx\fP\fIrows\fP
Makes the screen larger than the default for the chosen model number.
This option has effect only in combination with extended data stream support
(controlled by the "tcl3270.extended" resource), and only if the host
supports the Query Reply structured field.
The number of columns multiplied by the number of rows must not exceed
16383 (3fff hex), the limit of 14-bit 3270 buffer addressing.
.TP
\fB\-port\fP \fIn\fP
Specifies a different \s-1TCP\s+1 port to connect to.
\fIn\fP can be a name from \fB/etc/services\fP like \fBtelnet\fP, or a
number.
This option changes the default port number used for all connections.
(The positional parameter affects only the initial connection.)
.TP
\fB\-proxy \fItype\fP:\fIhost\fP[:\fIport\fP]\fP
Causes \fBtcl3270\fP to connect via the specified proxy, instead of
using a direct connection.
The \fIhost\fP can be an IP address or hostname.
The optional \fIport\fP can be a number or a service name.
For a list of supported proxy \fItypes\fP, see \s-1PROXY\s+1
below.
.TP
\fB\-set\fP \fItoggle\fP
Sets the initial value of \fItoggle\fP to \fBtrue\fP.
The \fB\-p\fP option of \fIx3270if\fP causes it to use this socket,
instead of pipes specified by environment variables.
.TP
\fB\-tn\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies the terminal name to be transmitted over the telnet connection.
The default name is
\fBIBM\-\fP\fImodel_name\fP\fB\-E\fP,
for example,
\fBIBM\-3278\-4\-E\fP.
.IP
Some hosts are confused by the \fB\-E\fP
suffix on the terminal name, and will ignore the extra screen area on
models 3, 4 and 5.
Prepending an \fBs:\fP on the hostname, or setting the "tcl3270.extended"
resource to "false", removes the \fB\-E\fP
from the terminal name when connecting to such hosts.
.IP
The name can also be specified with the "tcl3270.termName" resource.
.TP
\fB\-trace\fP
Turns on data stream and event tracing at startup.
The default trace file name is
\fB/tmp/x3trc\fP.
.TP
\fB\-tracefile\fP \fIfile\fP
Specifies a file to save data stream and event traces into.
If the name starts with `>>', data will be appended to the file.
.TP
\fB\-tracefilesize\fP \fIsize\fP
Places a limit on the size of a trace file.
If this option is not specified, or is specified as \fB0\fP or \fBnone\fP,
the trace file size will be unlimited.
The minimum size is 64 Kbytes.
The value of \fIsize\fP can have a \fBK\fP or \fBM\fP suffix, indicating
kilobytes or megabytes respectively.
When the trace file reaches the size limit, it will be renamed with a 
`-' appended and a new file started.
.TP
\fB\-user\fP \fIname\fP
Specifies the user name for RFC 4777 support.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP
Display the version and build options for \fBtcl3270\fP and exit.
.TP
\fB\-verifycert\fP
For SSL/TLS connections, verify the host certificate, and do not allow
the connection to complete unless it can be validated. (This is the default
setting.)
This option is overridden by a \fBy:\fP prepended to the hostname when
connecting.
.TP
\fB\-xrm\fP "tcl3270.\fIresource\fP: \fIvalue\fP"
Sets the value of the named \fIresource\fP to \fIvalue\fP.
Resources control less common \fBtcl3270\fP
options, and are defined under \s-1RESOURCES\s+1 below.
.TP
\fB\-\-\fP
Terminates the list of \fBtcl3270\fP options.
Whatever follows will be available to the script in the \fB$argv\fP
tcl variable.

.SH "COMMANDS"
\fBtcl3270\fP supports the following additional tcl commands:
).PP
Actions marked with an asterisk (*) may block, sending data to the host and
possibly waiting for a response.
.PP
.TS
center; lw(3i) lw(3i).
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ascii
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return entire screen contents as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ascii \fIlength\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen contents at cursor as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ascii \fIrow\fP \fIcol\fP \fIlength\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen contents as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ascii \fIrow\fP \fIcol\fP \fIrows\fP \fIcols\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen region as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
AsciiField
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return current field as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Attn
T}	T{
.na
.nh
attention key
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
BackSpace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor left (or send \s-1ASCII BS\s+1)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
BackTab
T}	T{
.na
.nh
tab to start of previous input field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
CircumNot
T}	T{
.na
.nh
input "^" in \s-1NVT\s+1 mode, or "notsign" in 3270 mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Clear
T}	T{
.na
.nh
clear screen
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Cols
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report screen size
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Connect \fIhost\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
connect to \fIhost\fP
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*CursorSelect
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Cursor Select \s-1AID\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Delete
T}	T{
.na
.nh
delete character under cursor (or send \s-1ASCII DEL\s+1)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
DeleteField
T}	T{
.na
.nh
delete the entire field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
DeleteWord
T}	T{
.na
.nh
delete the current or previous word
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Disconnect
T}	T{
.na
.nh
disconnect from host
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Down
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor down
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Dup
T}	T{
.na
.nh
duplicate field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ebcdic
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return entire screen contents in \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ebcdic \fIlength\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen contents at cursor in \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ebcdic \fIrow\fP \fIcol\fP \fIlength\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen contents in \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Ebcdic \fIrow\fP \fIcol\fP \fIrows\fP \fIcols\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return screen region in \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
EbcdicField
T}	T{
.na
.nh
return current field in \s-1EBCDIC\s+1
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Enter
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Enter \s-1AID\s+1 (or send \s-1ASCII CR\s+1)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Erase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
erase previous character (or send \s-1ASCII BS\s+1)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
EraseEOF
T}	T{
.na
.nh
erase to end of current field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
EraseInput
T}	T{
.na
.nh
erase all input fields
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
FieldEnd
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to end of field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
FieldMark
T}	T{
.na
.nh
mark field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
HexString \fIhex_digits\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
insert control-character string
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Home
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to first input field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Insert
T}	T{
.na
.nh
set insert mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Interrupt
T}	T{
.na
.nh
send \s-1TELNET IP\s+1 to host
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Key \fIkeysym\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
insert key \fIkeysym\fP
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Key 0x\fIxx\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
insert key with character code \fIxx\fP
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Left
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor left
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Left2
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor left 2 positions
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
MonoCase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
toggle uppercase-only mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
MoveCursor \fIrow\fP \fIcol\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to zero-origin (\fIrow\fP,\fIcol\fP)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Newline
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to first field on next line (or send \s-1ASCII LF\s+1)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
NextWord
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to next word
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*PA \fIn\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Program Attention \s-1AID\s+1 (\fIn\fP from 1 to 3)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*PF \fIn\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Program Function \s-1AID\s+1 (\fIn\fP from 1 to 24)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
PreviousWord
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to previous word
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Quit
T}	T{
.na
.nh
exit \fBtcl3270\fP
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Redraw
T}	T{
.na
.nh
redraw window
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Reset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
reset locked keyboard
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Right
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor right
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Right2
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor right 2 positions
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
ReadBuffer Ascii
T}	T{
.na
.nh
dump screen buffer as text
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
ReadBuffer Ebcdic
T}	T{
.na
.nh
dump screen buffer in EBCDIC
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Rows
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report screen size
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap
T}	T{
.na
.nh
same as \fBSnap Save\fP
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Ascii
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved screen data (see \fBAscii\fP)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Cols
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved screen size
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Ebcdic
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved screen data (see \fBEbcdic\fP)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap ReadBuffer
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved screen data (see \fBReadBuffer\fP)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Rows
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved screen size
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Save
T}	T{
.na
.nh
save screen image
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Snap Status
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report saved connection status
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Snap Wait [\fItimeout\fP] Output
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for host output and save screen image
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Status
T}	T{
.na
.nh
report connection status
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*String \fIstring\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
insert string (simple macro facility)
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Tab
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor to next input field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Toggle \fIoption\fP[
T}	T{
.na
.nh
toggle an option
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
ToggleInsert
T}	T{
.na
.nh
toggle insert mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
ToggleReverse
T}	T{
.na
.nh
toggle reverse-input mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Transfer \fIoption\fP=\fIvalue\fP...'
T}	T{
.na
.nh
file transfer
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
Up
T}	T{
.na
.nh
move cursor up
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Wait [\fItimeout\fP] 3270mode
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for 3270 mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Wait [\fItimeout\fP] Disconnect
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for host to disconnect
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Wait [\fItimeout\fP] InputField
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for valid input field
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Wait [\fItimeout\fP] NVTMode
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for NVT mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
.in +2
.ti -2
*Wait [\fItimeout\fP] Output
T}	T{
.na
.nh
wait for more host output
T}
.TE
.LP
Note that certain parameters to tcl3270 actions (such as the names of files
and keymaps) are subject to \fIsubstitutions\fP:
.LP
The character \fB~\fP at the beginning of a string is replaced with the user's
home directory.
A \fB~\fP character followed by a username is
replaced with that user's home directory.
.LP
Environment variables are substituted using the Unix shell convention of
$\fIname\fP or ${\fIname\fP}.
.LP
Two special pseudo-environment variables are supported. ${TIMESTAMP} is
replaced with a microsecond-resolution timestamp; ${UNIQUE} is replaced with a
string guaranteed to make a unique filename (the process ID optionally
followed by a dash and a string of digits). ${UNIQUE} is used to form trace
file names.
.SH "FILE TRANSFER"
The \fBTransfer\fP command implements \fBIND$FILE\fP file transfer.
This command requires that the \fBIND$FILE\fP
program be installed on the \s-1IBM\s+1 host, and that the 3270 cursor
be located in a field that will accept a \s-1TSO\s+1 or \s-1VM/CMS\s+1 command.
.LP
.LP
Because of the complexity and number of options for file transfer, the
parameters to the \fBTransfer\fP command take the unique form
of \fIoption\fP=\fIvalue\fP, and can appear in any order.
Note that if the \fIvalue\fP contains spaces (such as a VM/CMS file name),
then the entire parameter must be quoted, e.g., "HostFile=xxx foo a".
The options are:
.LP
.TS
l c l l.
T{
.na
.nh
Option
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Required?
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Default
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Other Values
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
Direction
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
receive
T}	T{
.na
.nh
send
T}
T{
.na
.nh
HostFile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
LocalFile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Host
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
tso
T}	T{
.na
.nh
vm, cics
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Mode
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
ascii
T}	T{
.na
.nh
binary
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Cr
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
remove
T}	T{
.na
.nh
add, keep
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Remap
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
yes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
no
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Exist
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
keep
T}	T{
.na
.nh
replace, append
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Recfm
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
fixed, variable, undefined
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Lrecl
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Blksize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Allocation
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
tracks, cylinders, avblock
T}
T{
.na
.nh
PrimarySpace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Sometimes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
SecondarySpace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
Avblock
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Sometimes
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
T{
.na
.nh
BufferSize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No
T}	T{
.na
.nh
4096
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}
.TE
.LP
The option details are as follows.
.TP
\fBDirection\fP
\fBsend\fP to send a file to the host,
\fBreceive\fP to receive a file from the host.
.TP
\fBHostFile\fP
The name of the file on the host.
.TP
\fBLocalFile\fP
The name of the file on the local workstation.
.TP
\fBHost\fP
The type of host (which dictates the form of the \fBIND$FILE\fP command):
\fBtso\fP (the default), \fBvm\fP or \fBcics\fP.
.TP
\fBMode\fP
Use \fBascii\fP (the default) for a text file, which will be translated
between \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 and \s-1ASCII\s+1 as necessary.
Use \fBbinary\fP for non-text files.
.TP
\fBCr\fP
Controls how \fBNewline\fP characters are handled when transferring
\fBMode=ascii\fP files.
\fBremove\fP (the default) strips \fBNewline\fP characters in local files
before transferring them to the host.
\fBadd\fP adds \fBNewline\fP characters to each host file record before
transferring it to the local workstation.
\fBkeep\fP preserves \fBNewline\fP characters when transferring a local file
to the host.
.TP
\fBRemap\fP
Controls text translation for \fBMode=ascii\fP files.
The value \fByes\fP (the default) causes tcl3270 to remap the text to ensure
maximum compatibility between the workstation's character set and encoding
and the host's \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 code page.
The value \fBno\fP causes tcl3270 to pass the text to or from the host
as-is, leaving all translation to the \fBIND$FILE\fP program on the host.
.TP
\fBExist\fP
Controls what happens when the destination file already exists.
\fBkeep\fP (the default) preserves the file, causing the
\fBTransfer\fP command to fail.
\fBreplace\fP overwrites the destination file with the source file.
\fBappend\fP appends the source file to the destination file.
.TP
\fBRecfm\fP
Controls the record format of files created on the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
\fBfixed\fP creates a file with fixed-length records.
\fBvariable\fP creates a file with variable-length records.
\fBundefined\fP creates a file with undefined-length records (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts
only).
The \fBLrecl\fP option controls the record length or maximum record length for
\fBRecfm=fixed\fP and \fBRecfm=variable\fP files, respectively.
.TP
\fBLrecl\fP
Specifies the record length (or maximum record length) for files created on
the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBBlksize\fP
Specifies the block size for files created on the host.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 and \s-1VM\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBAllocation\fP
Specifies the units for the \fBPrimarySpace\fP and
\fBSecondarySpace\fP options: \fBtracks\fP, \fBcylinders\fP or
\fBavblock\fP. (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBPrimarySpace\fP
Primary allocation for a file.
The units are given by the \fBAllocation\fP option.
Required when the \fBAllocation\fP is specified as something other than
\fBdefault\fP.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBSecondarySpace\fP
Secondary allocation for a file.
The units are given by the \fBAllocation\fP option. (\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.) 
.TP
\fBAvblock\fP
Average block size, required when \fBAllocation\fP specifies \fBavblock\fP.
(\s-1TSO\s+1 hosts only.)
.TP
\fBBufferSize\fP
Buffer size for DFT-mode transfers.
Can range from 256 to 32768.
Larger values give better performance, but some hosts may not be able to
support them.
.LP
There are also resources that control the default values for each of the
file transfer parameters.
These resources have the same names as the \fBTransfer\fP keywords, but with
\fBft\fP prepended. E.g., the default for the \fBMode\fP keyword is the
\fBtcl3270.ftMode\fP resource.

.SH "THE PRINTTEXT ACTION"
The \fBPrintText\fP produces screen snapshots in a number of different
forms.
The default form wth no arguments sends a copy of the screen to the default
printer.
A single argument is
the command to use to print, e.g., \fBlpr\fP.
.LP
Multiple arguments can include keywords to control the output of
\fBPrintText\fP:
.TP
\fBfile\fP \fIfilename\fP
Save the output in a file.
.TP
\fBhtml\fP
Save the output as HTML.  This option implies \fBfile\fP.
.TP
\fBrtf\fP
Save the output as RichText.  This option implies \fBfile\fP.
The font defaults to \fBCourier New\fP and the
point size defaults to 8.
These can be overridden by the \fBprintTextFont\fP and \fBprintTextSize\fP
resources, respectively.
.TP
\fBstring\fP
Return the output as a string.  This can only be used from scripts.
.TP
\fBmodi\fP
Render modified fields in italics.
.TP
\fBcaption\fP \fItext\fP
Add the specified \fItext\fP as a caption above the output.
Within \fItext\fP, the special sequence \fB%T%\fP will be replaced with
a timestamp.
.TP
\fBcommand\fP \fIcommand\fP
Directs the output to a command.
This allows one or more of the other keywords to be specified, while still
sending the output to the printer.

.SH "NESTED SCRIPTS"
.TP
\fBThe String Command\fP
The simplest method for
nested scripts is provided via the \fBString\fP
command.
The arguments to \fBString\fP are one or more double-quoted strings which are
inserted directly as if typed.
The C backslash conventions are honored as follows.
(Entries marked * mean that after sending the \s-1AID\s+1 code to the host,
\fBtcl3270\fP will wait for the host to unlock the keyboard before further
processing the string.)
.TS
l l.
T{
.na
.nh
\eb
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Left
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\ee\fIxxxx\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
EBCDIC character in hex
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\ef
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Clear*
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\en
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Enter*
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\epa\fIn\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
PA(\fIn\fP)*
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\epf\fInn\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
PF(\fInn\fP)*
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\er
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Newline
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\et
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Tab
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\eT
T}	T{
.na
.nh
BackTab
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\eu\fIxxxx\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Unicode character in hex
T}
T{
.na
.nh
\ex\fIxxxx\fP
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Unicode character in hex
T}
.TE
.IP
Note that the numeric values for the \ee, \eu and \ex sequences
can be abbreviated to 2 digits.
Note also that EBCDIC codes greater than 255 and some Unicode character codes
represent DBCS characters, which will work only if tcl3270 is built with
DBCS support and the host allows DBCS input in the current field.
.IP
\fBNote:\fP
The strings are in \s-1ASCII\s+1 and converted to \s-1EBCDIC\s+1,
so beware of inserting
control codes.
.IP
There is also an alternate form of the \fBString\fP command, \fBHexString\fP,
which is used to enter non-printing data.
The argument to \fBHexString\fP is a string of hexadecimal digits, two per
character.  A leading 0x or 0X is optional.
In 3270 mode, the hexadecimal data represent \s-1EBCDIC\s+1 characters, which
are entered into the current field.
In \s-1NVT\s+1 mode, the hexadecimal data represent \s-1ASCII\s+1 characters,
which are sent directly to the host.

.SH "PASSTHRU"
\fBtcl3270\fP supports the Sun \fItelnet-passthru\fP
service provided by the \fIin.telnet-gw\fP server.
This allows outbound telnet connections through a firewall machine.
When a \fBp:\fP is prepended to a hostname, \fBtcl3270\fP
acts much like the \fIitelnet\fP(1) command.
It contacts the machine named \fBinternet-gateway\fP at the port defined in
\fB/etc/services\fP as \fBtelnet-passthru\fP
(which defaults to 3514).
It then passes the requested hostname and port to the
\fBin.telnet-gw\fP server.
.SH "PROXY"
The \fB\-proxy\fP option or the \fBtcl3270.proxy\fP resource
causes tcl3270 to use a proxy server to connect to the host.
The syntax of the option or resource is:
.RS
\fItype\fP:\fIhost\fP[:\fIport\fP]

.RE
The supported values for \fItype\fP are:
.TS
center;
c l c .
T{
.na
.nh
Proxy Type
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Protocol
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Default Port
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
http
T}	T{
.na
.nh
RFC 2817 HTTP tunnel (squid)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
3128
T}
T{
.na
.nh
passthru
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Sun in.telnet-gw
T}	T{
.na
.nh
none
T}
T{
.na
.nh
socks4
T}	T{
.na
.nh
SOCKS version 4
T}	T{
.na
.nh
1080
T}
T{
.na
.nh
socks5
T}	T{
.na
.nh
SOCKS version 5 (RFC 1928)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
1080
T}
T{
.na
.nh
telnet
T}	T{
.na
.nh
No protocol (just send \fBconnect\fP \fIhost port\fP)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
none
T}
.TE
.LP
The special types \fBsocks4a\fP and \fBsocks5d\fP can also be used to force
the proxy server to do the hostname resolution for the SOCKS protocol.
.SH "RESOURCES"
Certain \fBtcl3270\fP
options can be configured via resources.
Resources are defined
by \fB\-xrm\fP options.
The definitions are similar to X11 resources, and use a similar syntax.
The resources available in \fBtcl3270\fP are:
.LP
.TS
l l l l.
T{
.na
.nh
Resource
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Default
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Option
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Purpose
T}
_
T{
.na
.nh
blankFill
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-set blankFill
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Blank Fill mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
charset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
bracket
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-charset
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1EBCDIC\s+1 character set
T}
T{
.na
.nh
dbcsCgcsgid
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Override DBCS CGCSGID
T}
T{
.na
.nh
dsTrace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-trace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Data stream tracing
T}
T{
.na
.nh
eof
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^D
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode \s-1EOF\s+1 character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
erase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^H
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode erase character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
extended
T}	T{
.na
.nh
True
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Use 3270 extended data stream
T}
T{
.na
.nh
eventTrace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-trace
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Event tracing
T}
T{
.na
.nh
icrnl
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Map \s-1CR\s+1 to \s-1NL\s+1 on \s-1NVT\s+1-mode input
T}
T{
.na
.nh
inlcr
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Map \s-1NL\s+1 to \s-1CR\s+1 in \s-1NVT\s+1-mode input
T}
T{
.na
.nh
intr
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^C
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode interrupt character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
kill
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^U
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode kill character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
lineWrap
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-set lineWrap
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1 line wrap mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
lnext
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^V
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode lnext character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
m3279
T}	T{
.na
.nh
(note 1)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-model
T}	T{
.na
.nh
3279 (color) emulation
T}
T{
.na
.nh
monoCase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-set monoCase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Mono-case mode
T}
T{
.na
.nh
numericLock
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Lock keyboard for numeric field error
T}
T{
.na
.nh
oerrLock
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Lock keyboard for input error
T}
T{
.na
.nh
oversize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-oversize
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Oversize screen dimensions
T}
T{
.na
.nh
port
T}	T{
.na
.nh
telnet
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-port
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Non-default TCP port
T}
T{
.na
.nh
quit
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^\e
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode quit character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
rprnt
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^R
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode reprint character
T}
T{
.na
.nh
sbcsCgcsgid
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Override SBCS CGCSGID
T}
T{
.na
.nh
secure
T}	T{
.na
.nh
False
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Disable "dangerous" options
T}
T{
.na
.nh
termName
T}	T{
.na
.nh
(note 2)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-tn
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1TELNET\s+1 terminal type string
T}
T{
.na
.nh
traceDir
T}	T{
.na
.nh
/tmp
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
Directory for trace files
T}
T{
.na
.nh
traceFile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
(note 3)
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\-tracefile
T}	T{
.na
.nh
File for trace output
T}
T{
.na
.nh
werase
T}	T{
.na
.nh
^W
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\ 
T}	T{
.na
.nh
\s-1NVT\s+1-mode word-erase character
T}
.TE
.LP
.RS
\fINote 1\fP: \fBm3279\fP defaults to
\fBFalse\fP.
It can be forced to \fBTrue\fP with the proper \fB\-model\fP
option.
.LP
\fINote 2\fP:
The default terminal type string is constructed from the model number, color
emulation, and extended data stream modes.
E.g., a model 2 with color emulation and the extended data stream option
would be sent as \fBIBM-3279-2-E\fP.
Note also that when \s-1TN3270E\s+1
mode is used, the terminal type is always sent as 3278, but this does not
affect color capabilities.
.LP
\fINote 3\fP: The default trace file is
\fBx3trc.\fP\fIpid\fP in the directory specified by
the \fBtraceDir\fP resource.




.RE
.LP
If more than one \fB\-xrm\fP option is given for the same resource,
the last one on the command line is used.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
s3270(1), , x3270(1), c3270(1), telnet(1), tn3270(1)
.br
Data Stream Programmer's Reference, IBM GA23-0059
.br
Character Set Reference, IBM GA27-3831
.br
RFC 1576, TN3270 Current Practices
.br
RFC 1646, TN3270 Extensions for LUname and Printer Selection
.br
RFC 2355, TN3270 Enhancements
.SH "COPYRIGHTS"
Copyright 1993-2020, Paul Mattes.
.br
Copyright 2004-2005, Don Russell.
.br
Copyright 2004, Dick Altenbern.
.br
Copyright 1990, Jeff Sparkes.
.br
Copyright 1989, Georgia Tech Research Corporation (GTRC), Atlanta, GA
 30332.
.br
All rights reserved.
.LP
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

.TP
*
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.TP
*
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.TP
*
Neither the names of Paul Mattes, Don Russell, Dick Altenbern, Jeff Sparkes,
GTRC nor
the names of their contributors may be used to endorse or promote
products derived from this software without specific prior written
permission.

.LP
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY PAUL MATTES, DON RUSSELL, DICK ALTENBERN, JEFF
SPARKES AND GTRC
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL PAUL MATTES, DON RUSSELL, DICK
ALTENBERN, JEFF
SPARKES OR GTRC BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.SH "VERSION"
tcl3270 3.6ga12
