'\" t
.TH mitm 1 "20 March 2024"
.SH "NAME"
mitm \- network stream trace facility
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBmitm\fP [\-p \fIlistenport\fP] [\-f \fIoutfile\fP]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBmitm\fP is a proxy server that traces the data passing through it.
It supports the Sun \fIpassthru\fP protocol, where the client writes the
desired host name and port, separated by a space and terminated by a carriage
return and line feed, at the beginning of the session.
.LP
Network data is written in hexadecimal to the specified file.
.LP
The name is derived from its position in the network stream: the man in the
middle.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-p\fP \fIlistenport\fP
Specifies the port to listen on.
The default port is 4200.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIoutfile\fP
Specifies the trace file to create.
The default is
/tmp/mitm.\fIpid\fP.
.SH "EXAMPLE"
The emulator command-line option to route connection through \fBmitm\fP
is:
.IP
.RS
\-proxy passthru:127.0.0.1:4200
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
s3270(1), 
x3270(1), c3270(1)
.SH "COPYRIGHTS"
Copyright 2018-2024, Paul Mattes.
.br
All rights reserved.
.LP
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

.TP
*
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.TP
*
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.TP
*
Neither the name of Paul Mattes nor the names of his contributors may be used
to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific
prior written permission.

.LP
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY PAUL MATTES
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL PAUL MATTES
BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.SH "VERSION"
mitm 4.4pre1
